date: 2007-10-23 11:52:55
slug: leaving-closed-protocols-behind
title: Leaving closed protocols behind
category: Personal
tags: opinion
status: draft

In order to fulfill what has been a proposition of mine for quite a long time,
**as of December the 1st 2007, I will no longer use any Instant Messaging
services based on a _closed protocol_, e.g. MSN, ICQ, AIM or Yahoo. The only
way you will be able to contact me (besides conventional methods such as phone
and email) will be through my Jabber ID: _salvatore.iovene at googlemail.com_**
(replace "at" with "@"). This also works from GMail.


### Reason

Proprietary IM systems have a terrible flaw: MSN users can't chat with Yahoo
users, AIM can't chat with ICQ, and so on. So if I have friends who only use
MSN and other friends who only use ICQ, I will have to use both to keep in
touch with everybody. The reason for this is the **corporate greed** taking
advantage of the _network effect_. Wikipedia says:

> The network effect is a characteristic that causes a good or service to have
> a value to a potential customer dependent on the number of customers already
> owning that good or using that service.

This also reflects the fact that corporates are valuing their own profit better
than the final user's satisfaction. Moreover, I don't like the idea of using a
closed protocol. "Closed protocol" means that the data (e.g. chat messages)
exchanged by two computers involved in a transaction, is represented with a
secret format, that the user is not allowed to study.  Jabber, on the other
hand, uses an open protocol, based on XML. Everybody is allowed to study the
protocol, and write clients or servers that support it. This allow
collaboration and cooperation. Greedy corporates, instead, keep the protocol
secret in order to be the only ones able to write a client and a server for it,
so they impose you the use of their clients (such MSN) which might be bloated
with spyware and advertisements.

Since I've decided that I don't want to support this kind of behaviour, I will
unsubscribe from the closed protocol services that I use. You don't have to do
the same, but just get yourself a Jabber account in order to keep in touch with
me, and, preferrably, convince your friends to do the same.


### What is Jabber?

When you hear someone (probably me) talking about Jabber, they are usually
referring to one of the following:

  * The XMPP (Jabber) Protocol
  * The Public Federated Jabber Network (PFJN)
  * The Jabber Platform (which includes the previous items, as well as jabber
    chat clients, devices, transports, etc.)

Jabber is, strictly speaking, the informal name of an open-standard
decentralized instant messaging protocol officially called XMPP.

NOTE: It is also the name of a company called Jabber Inc., which sells
Jabber-based products. However, the Jabber platform is much larger than this
single company. Don't let this confuse you! If you want to go to the
authoritative website about jabber, that would be jabber.org, not jabber.com!

The network of independent Jabber servers on the internet make up the Public
Federated Jabber Network. If you have an account on a server on the PFJN, then
you can communicate with anyone else who has an account on a PFJN server. This
means that Google Talk users can communicate seamlessly with Gizmo-Project
users (and vice-versa), as both of these services are on the Public Federated
Jabber Network.


### How can I use Jabber?

To use Jabber you need a Jabber client and an account on a server. Here's a
list of popular clients:


#### MS Windows

  * [Pandion](http://www.pandion.be/)
  * [Psi](http://www.psi-im.org/)
  * [Google Talk Client](http://talk.google.com/) (works only with google talk,
    supports voice chat via jingle)
  * [Gizmo Project Client](http://www.gizmoproject.com/) (Works only with gizmo
    project, supports SIP/VOIP)
  * [Gaim](http://gaim.sf.net/)
  * [Trillian Pro](http://www.ceruleanstudios.com/)


#### MacOS X

  * [iChat AV](http://www.apple.com/ichat/)
  * [Adium](http://www.adiumx.com/)
  * [Psi](http://www.psi-im.org/)
  * [Gizmo Project Client](http://www.gizmoproject.com/) (Works only with gizmo
    project, supports SIP/VOIP)


#### GNU/Linux

  * [Gaim](http://gaim.sf.net/)
  * [Psi](http://www.psi-im.org/)

Then you will need an account. Most of the listed clients will allow you to
create a Jabber account choosing from a list of servers, or, if you want, you
can run your own server.


#### Google Talk

If you have a GMail account, then you have a jabber id via [Google
Talk](http://talk.google.com/)! Your jabber id is the same as your email
address. You can use either the native google talk client or any other jabber
client.


#### Gizmo Project

Also, if you use the [Gizmo Project](http://www.gizmoproject.com/), you too
have a jabber account. Your jabber ID is
`**login-name**@chat.gizmoproject.com`.


#### jabber.org

The [Jabber Software Foundation](http://www.jabber.org) is probably the best
known Jabber server out there. They just [recently
switched](http://www.pgmillard.com/blog/?p=74) over to
[ejabberd](http://ejabberd.jabber.ru/) for their software, so they should be
quite solid now.
