date: 2010-05-26 18:07:16
slug: companies-2-0-cheer-for-them-like-football-teams
title: Companies 2.0, cheer for them like football teams
category: Technology

Before the last few years, I don't recall anyone saying they were fans of some
company. I could imagine people saying "_I like Ford cars"_ and _"I prefer
Ben&Jerry ice cream."_

But being fans? No, I'm positive I've never heard or read anything like that.

Nowadays I read and hear it on a daily basis. People are fans of Google, Apple,
Nokia. They literally cheer for their favorite company, watching their direct
(patent lawsuits) and indirect (new products competing each other) battles, and
hoping that _it_ wins in the end.

Facebook, being extremely unpopular these days despite [me thinking it's no
biggie](/231), is indeed risking a damn lot just because of the cost of being
_uncool_.

What does this tell? Is there a precise connection between the quality of one's
product and its perceived coolness? Or is there a link between the marketing
and this coolness? Perhaps none, perhaps both. A company goes building an
image, and it looks like each single tiny thing that happens plays a part into
generating this public image.

Apple has seen a tremendous explosion of popularity since the iPhone, and
that's helped a lot with building an image. An image that's really difficult to
eradicate. Let's be honest: the iPhone's hardware is far from the competitors'
(see Nokia's and HTC's recent devices) and the software is _barely_ catching up
(multitasking? It was about time.) Still, they're going to continue being
_cool_, no matter how many times they'll market thinks like _Cut & Paste_ like
the best invention since sliced bread. Why? You know it: because first
impressions are hard to go.

So what has a company to do, today, to be cool? Where is the line between
meeting the expectations for the sake of not disappointing the user base, and
exceeding them with the risk of being ahead of the times?

I can identify a few things to keep in mind.

**Confidence.** Whether we're talking about marketing, or pushing for a risky
idea, having confidence matters a lot. Dealing with large user bases comes with
two big problems: you can't make everyone happy and you have to tell your user
what they want while allowing them to feel that they're getting what they
_thought_ they wanted. It is risky, but it's the only way to lead. If your
company lacks the confidence to do that, it's in trouble.

**Honesty.** Your users are smart. Maybe not all, but enough of them are smart
enough to make noise. [Don't try to fool them.](/240) Perhaps you'll sell a
little more units in the short term, but your public image will deteriorate.

**Integrity.** [Making mistakes is
OK](http://www.dailyfinance.com/story/facebooks-zuckerberg-admits-mistakes-pledges-privacy-changes/19489378/),
but it doesn't work if nobody believes you. You need to have a clear set of
values, and stick to them.

All in all, it boils down to the DBAA principle, i.e. _Don't Be An Ass_. Do
that, and make sure you are able to give your users what they want and what
they don't know they want, and people will cheer for you.
