date: 2011-02-12 21:37:23
slug: m106-and-the-story-of-phoebe-the-lucky-photon
title: M106 and the story of Phoebe the lucky Photon
category: Astronomy
tags: astrophotography, Canon450D, ED80, galaxy, m106, ngc4217, ngc4220, ngc4248, QHY5, USNO-A2 1350-08086503, USNO-A2 1350-08087625, USNO-A2 1350-08087628

[![][1]][1]

The one above might not be an exceptional photo, and certainly it's beyond the
limits of my equipment, but I would like you to ponder something. See those
galaxies? Forget what they are. Just concentrate on the _pixels_ in the image
that make them up.

Each of those pixels, if you will turn a bind eye to the fact that this is a
scaled down image, corresponds to a tiny sensor of the CMOS chip of my camera.
This tiny sensor, as small as 5 thousandths of a millimeter, is like a bucket.
But rather than drops of water, it collects photons.

A photon is the smallest possible amount of light. Trillions hit you every
minute. Some of them are absorbed by you, others bounce off and give you color.
I didn't catch many photons in this photograph, because those galaxies are
very, very far away. Twenty-five million light-years away.

The journey of each of this photons is incredible, and statistically
impossible. Somewhere inside one of the hundred billion stars in one of those
galaxies, two hydrogen atoms smashed together at the right angle, under strong
forces causes by gravity and, thence, pressure. This small accident, occurred
over 25 million years ago, released, among other things, a photon. Our lucky
girl. Phoebe the Photon shall be her name.

Phoebe begun her life near the core of her star, and it took her a while to get
out. She was bouncing, being absorbed and emitted again an uncountable number
of times. Each time she bounced, the direction of her traveling was randomly
modified. It took her something between 10'000 and 100'000 years to finally
endure her last bounce and finally be free of the warm interiors of the star
that gave her birth.

It sounds incredible, but of all possible directions in the three dimensions
she could've taken, Phoebe was headed towards our galaxy! Even more than that,
actually: she was headed towards the spot that our galaxy would occupy 25
million years later. She traveled in the near absolute zero cold of the void
intergalactic space, and it was a long journey.

How can you believe that of all the places in our galaxy, Phoebe was going to
hit our Solar System? And you know, that's a big place. Compared to the Solar
System, the Earth is tiny. It's tinier than a particularly small grain of sand
in a football field. But Phoebe was going there. More than that: for a
ridiculous trick of the Universe, she was going to hit the tiny lens of my
telescope! Had she come five minutes later or earlier, she would've hit the
ground next to it. And what are five minutes, when she's just completed a
journey of twenty-five million years?

The lens of the telescope has deflected Phoebe's trajectory slightly, and sent
her off to hit a tiny bucket in the sensor of my camera.

Welcome to Earth Phoebe.

[1]: |filename|/images/2011_m106.jpg "M106"
